you
Oh everybody this is a talk in the
series about planets and I'm starting on
this one with the king of the planets
Jupiter this is a picture that I took of
the giant planets using my fourteen inch
reflector at my home observatory just
outside Cambridge and you can see the
cloud belts the Great Red Spot various
white spots down there towards the lower
regions of the planets and a lot of
turbulence and some brown colors in the
main belts they're really rather than
nice picture but this is D with a small
telescope or even a good pair of
binoculars you'd see the disc of the
planet quite clearly and you can see
those two main dark belts running across
it just north and south of its Equator
you also see that it's slightly fatter
across the equator than it is from pole
to pole but around it you can see in
this picture four little white dots two
on each side those are the Galilean
moons the four big moons of Jupiter
discovered by Galileo when he first
turned his telescope up to the heavens
and looked at this object
now if we look at Jupiter in a bit more
detail here's an even better image of
the planets again with the Great Red
Spot and those white spots across the
bottom and all the turbulence in the
cloud belts of course we're only seeing
the upper atmosphere here but after all
Jupiter is mostly made of atmosphere
it's a gas giant composed of 88 percent
hydrogen 10 percent helium and a little
bit of the other items the other
chemicals that are listed there methane
ethane water ammonia hydrogen sulfide
phosphine and benzene various other
things all sorts of interesting
chemicals going up to the great red spot
where there's ammonium hydrosulfide and
the brown material in the belts is
probably organic compounds called
phonons which seem to be very common in
the rest of the solar system they're
naturally formed if you have a mixture
of ammonia water and the organic
compounds like methane and ethane then
you expose them to ultraviolet light and
you tend to get these complex polymers
that we lump together with the name
phone-in and they have this brown color
you can also see in this image though
that little black dot that's the shadow
of one of Jupiter's moons transiting
across the face of the planet this is a
fairly regular occurrence because there
are four of them and they whiz around
the innermost one only takes a day and a
half to do an orbit so it's fairly
frequently crossing in front of the face
of Jupiter from our line of sight
creating this mini eclipse if we're all
Jupiter's atmosphere and spread it all
out where we keep the red spot in the
same place then you can get an animation
like this where you can see how the red
spot is rotating there's a violent
hurricane that's been raging on the
planet ever since Galileo in fact he saw
it 400 years ago it's been going ever
since and you can see how all the other
lesser
bots are also small hurricanes small
storm systems and they're moving along
and some of them get eaten by the Great
Red Spot you can also see how different
layers in the atmosphere there move at
different speeds which is why when we
hold the Great Red Spot still you'll
seeing some of them appearing to go in
different directions and also look up at
the polar regions where things are
rather different we'll see that in more
detail here's a very good detailed image
of the great red spots showing all of
that turbulence being whirled around
into it and we have on the right and
animation again keeping the Great Red
Spot centered as one of the spacecraft
is approaching towards the planet there
and the stop motion animation gives you
that sense of the differential rotation
of the different layers now the moment
that Juno spacecraft is in orbit around
the giant planet Jupiter and sending
back some fantastic pictures here we're
looking down into the Great Red Spot and
you can see it kind of has a deep red
eye in the middle and then a number of
smaller vortex regions around the
outside of it that are sort of swirling
around themselves whilst all going
around in the main vortex so it's a
really complicated weather system but
Juno is the first spacecraft to orbit
pole to pole rather than following the
line of the equator at Jupiter and so
it's fing up over the polar regions and
looking down on them and we see this
amazingly different blue and white
coloration to the planet from this
aspect and again lots of these white
storms within that deep blue probably
ammonia rich layer there that's giving
it that blue color so what's going on we
think that there is probably a dense
rock and metal core right in the center
and perhaps that's three times the mass
of the earth
also a decent-sized rocky planet and
that probably gave it the extra gravity
to be able to then hang on to a lot of
the lighter materials and being further
from the Sun then we are further out
into the solar system 486 million miles
the amount of heat received at Jupiter
is really quite low and so the volatile
gases like hydrogen and helium are much
easier to hang on to during the
planet-forming process so there's this
tremendous layer above the rocky core
and the middle part of it we think is
mostly made of hydrogen but with the
pressure and temperature being quite
high the core is probably at 30,000
degrees very hot indeed and so the layer
above is really quite hot and that
immense pressure of all the overlying
regions being cooled in by gravity is
compressing the hydrogen into what's
called a liquid metal where all of the
hydrogen atoms are crushed so closely
together that they lose track of their
individual electrons and the electrons
are able to flow from atom to atom just
as they do in the familiar case of
metals here on earth and that makes it
conduct electricity very well which is
of course going to lead on to the
discussion about the magnetic field in a
moment and then right at the outer layer
where the pressure and temperature are
much lower the hydrogen is more normal
gas mixed with other chemicals as I've
said all that's electrically conducting
liquid metal hydrogen in the middle of
Jupiter churning away as Jupiter spins
very fast it only takes 10 and a half
hours for this giant planet to spin on
its axis it's creating an immense
magnetic field it's one of the strongest
magnetic fields in the solar system by
some margin and covers a huge distance
even some of Jupiter's moons there are
inside the trapped
radiation belts that go along with
having a strong magnetic field like this
an IO
particularly that's innermost moon there
is shown with a flux tube coupling it to
the surface of Jupiter all of the
magnetic field and the interaction with
the solar wind gives Jupiter a very
strong case of the Northern Lights here
the Aurora but showing up in that blue
color from the mixture of gases that
there are in the polar regions of
Jupiter it almost looks like there's a
welder's beam and arc welding beam spot
roaring out a spiral on the pole there
doesn't it and that is the material
spiraling in down Jupiter's magnetic
field and hitting the atmosphere now try
and show you some sounds of that from
Jupiter and this is a recording that's
been made it is the sound of the radio
emissions from Jupiter as well whistlers
where's high-pitched noises amazing
really we get these booming sounds and
the whistlers and then it's even higher
pitched noises coming along just in a
moment you can see them on the chart
there
almost sounds like et is trying to
communicate with us doesn't it it's the
natural hearing sounds in the atmosphere
interacting with radio a magnetic field
of Jupiter a bit of fun here the Juno
probe discovered the dolphin on Jupiter
it's a fantastic image it's taken here
elf Jupiter can can you see the dolphin
it's three more pictures of the open
here appears to be swimming along the
cloud belts of Jupiter really does look
like one doesn't it but of course if we
zoom right in then you can start to see
that really it's just a collection of
swirling clouds in the amazing
turbulence that has temporarily made it
look like that but it's a bit of fun now
we're going to talk just now about
Jupiter's moons and on the left
those are Galileo's original drawings of
the little moons orbiting around Jupiter
that he made going night tonight as we
work our way down he's written the dates
there that was in 1609
and on the right we've got a modern
amateur telescope image of Jupiter in
its moons but we sent a number of space
probes with the voyagers and the
pioneers and now also Juno they've all
taken a look at Jupiter's moons and they
are some of the most fantastic solar
system here are the big four Io Europa
Ganymede and Callisto and they set here
to scale IO and Europa are about the
size of the Earth's moon Ganymede is a
planet-sized object is larger than the
planet Mercury in fact if it orbited the
Sun we would call it a planet and
there's darker Callisto that's nearly
the same size
if we compare those four moons to moons
in the rest of the solar system and to
the earth there you can get a sense of
how the Earth's moons quite large then
you've got the four moons of Jupiter a
large moon called Titan at Saturn and
another large one out at Neptune called
Triton and those worlds being of that
size gives them the ability through them
so we have a couple of shots of each of
them here the full disk at the top there
of Io looking like a pizza covered in
sulfur and below it we zoom in and we
find sulfur volcanoes and lava flows on
the surface it's absolutely covered in
volcanoes Europa covered in ice there
and the cracks and grooves are showing
in the ice and again they've got those
brown chemicals probably these tollens
that I talked about the results of
organic matter methane and ethane and
ammonia interacting with water and
ultraviolet light and the question is
are they brown stains on Europa here
generated at the surface or are they
organic chemicals welling up from
underneath where we think there's a
liquid ocean so let's keep moving let's
look at IO in more detail here we've got
some active volcanoes on Io and in the
animation we've got one showing they're
actually pouring material up and out and
falling back across the surface but if
you look really closely there are
several other active volcanoes in that
image going off at the same time as
Europa with its grooves and its cracks
and I'm saying it has a metallic core
and probably a rock layer and then maybe
a hundred kilometers deep we have a
liquid ocean protected from outer space
by the ice covering and that Brown
organic material that's hinting that
there may be life in that ocean
intriguing possibility isn't it
and he made Ganymede is larger and has a
similar structure with a nice layer
possibly another liquid ocean beneath
the frozen outer surfaces a little bit
less geologically active but we still
think that it's warm enough in the
center for there to be a liquid ocean
and there's a chain of craters that have
hit one after another from a torn-up
comet there in that image on the right
now we think the reason that these three
moons are active and not frozen up is
because of the tidal tug-of-war that
they are doing as they orbit around
Jupiter as shown in this animation I
owed us four laps for every two of
Europa and every one of Ganymede very
precisely so if you watch IO it meets
your Oprah at the top goes round comes
out for a second time meets your Oprah
again and the same happens your Oprah is
going to catch Ganymede at the bottom
and then goes round nobody at home okay
round again meets Ganymede on the second
occurrence and that two to one to four
ratio gives these moons a gravitational
kick that puts them into elliptical
orbits and it's they elliptical nature
of the orbit that means they keep
approaching Jupiter and moving away
again and that means Jupiter's gravity
stirs up their internals warming them up
and keeping them from freezing broke
listo the fourth moon is out here on its
own not taking part in the dance it's
orbiting minding its own beams to have
got a solid core with no geological
activity and so they're just covered the
evidence of lots and lots of craters
built up over many many thousands of
millions of years since its formation
and they're not being rubbed out by new
glaciers or volcanoes erasing the
surface and at the fifth moon of Jupiter
a mouth ear discovered by EA Barnard in
1892 it's much smaller only 84
kilometers in diameter whereas the large
Galilean moons
are of the order of several thousand
kilometers in diameter each because it's
this small the gravity is not able to
overcome the shape retaining structure
of the rocks and pull it into a sphere
so it can't force the the rocks to
change shape and roll up into a nice
efficient round ball and so it's potato
shaped as we would call it and rather
irregular in appearance at all bits
quite close to Jupiter along with a
number of other moons and inside
Jupiter's largely invisible ring system
it does have a set of rings we can't see
them with amateur telescopes from home
but they were detected by various
spacecraft and space telescopes and dial
beeping around it it's absolutely
festooned with dozens and dozens of
moons they keep finding new ones I won't
bother to give you a number as to how
many there are because it'll be wrong in
a few days time when they or but so
these are all probably captured from the
asteroid belt
Prabhat out beyond the main asteroid
belt which is there shown between the
inner planets of Mercury Venus Earth and
Mars you then move out you get the
asteroid belt but leftover builders
rubble from the formation of the solar
system
perhaps a fifth planet ought to have
formed there but Jupiter being so
massive kept disturbing the orbits of
all of the material and hasn't really
given it a chance to settle down and
build one large planet in that region on
Jupiter then also captures the asteroids
and adds to its collection of moons plus
it's been followed around its orbit by
groups of asteroids 60 degrees ahead and
60 degrees behind at what's called the
Lagrange points we call these the Trojan
asteroids so Jupiter very much in charge
of the asteroid belt that's it
a short whiz round Jupiter and once
around the moons I hope you've enjoyed
that and will the next one which of
course will be Saturn and its rings and
moons thanks very much